---
layout: post
author: Veronica White
title: National Institute of Justice Research Assistantship Program Application Tips
tags: NIJ_RAP 
# need both visible 1 and published false to not publish post
published: true
# visible: 1
---

*The [NIJ RAP application](https://nij.ojp.gov/funding/nijs-research-assistantship-program) is **due 1/25/2021**. Please look at the website to learn more about the program itself. NIJ also offers fellowships most years for those currently looking to fund their graduate research on criminal justice.*

I received an email the other day from someone who was thinking of applying to the NIJ RAP program asking for application tips. I was eager to help demystify the application process that I experienced last year and typed up an email with various tips. It also got me thinking... Typically, I am not someone to reach out to random people to ask for tips/advice and I have always admired those that can. Maybe it's my social anxiety of talking to a complete stranger, maybe its the act of asking for a favor without anything to offer in return, maybe its my lack of self-confidence that my questions are good questions and that I deserve this highly qualified person's time/advice, maybe all of the above. Either way, this crippling hesitance to ask people or even knowing who to ask, shouldn't be (although it often is) the determining factor for what opportunities I come across or how well prepared I am when I apply. I understand that in today's society my hesitance to reach out puts me at a disadvantage, but I think this is a piece of the puzzle when thinking about the lack of diversity in higher education and of top positions in government and business. Gaining the knowledge and confidence to apply for these positions and opportunities often relies on who you know and talking with individuals in similar current positions. If you do not have access to those individuals or if you, like me, experience barriers in reaching out to strangers in those positions, it can limit you. I know I wouldn't be where I am today without asking my friend about their experience in applying and being a PhD student and similarly I know I was a main source of inspiration for another friend of mine to attend graduate school. 
<!-- Please do not mistake this hurdle I often face as laziness or lack of interest. I think it comes out of respect for others time and I often spend more time looking for/finding the answer myself online. -->

Therefore, to get more information out there and share my experience for *anyone* that is interested, I have decided to post my application tips here for anyone digging hard enough to find. Below are some tips for applying to the NIJ-RAP program:

* First I want to say, <u>Congratulations on deciding to apply</u> for the NIJ RAP program. I am only a few months in and even though it’s only been a virtual experience so far, it has been extremely valuable experience and the people are amazing to work with! Even if you don't get the assistantship, it is an excellent exercise to reflect on what you have done so far and your future career goals. This can help you picture your future career and be a starting point for other future applications. (Fun Fact: I had used my failed application to the NSF graduate fellowship as a starting point for my NIJ application. You will thank yourself later.)

* <u>Statement of interest essay</u> When I applied it asked for a 2 page statement of interest. Mine was 2 pages single spaced and made sure the font was big enough for anyone to read. I wrote it a lot like a typical cover letter. Coming from industrial engineering, I made sure I was careful when explaining how my past projects could apply to research/work I could do at NIJ. I also added why I was interested in terms of why now and how it fit into my overall career path and ended on a thank you. This is the document is the one that can showcase your attitude, personality, and passion/interests, so don't be afraid to talk about. Describe how your both qualified and interested in the RAP. Every sentence had a purpose. Here is [my statement of interest essay](/docs/Statement_of_Interest.pdf), to give you an idea.

* <u>Public Safety Challenge essay</u> The application asked for no more than 5 page essay asking about the greatest challenge or set of challenges that threaten public safety of our time. It also asked for future research questions in understanding and addressing the identified public safety challenge. My essay was 5 pages total including 2 pages of references (single spaced with 30ish references). I heavily relied on research and ideas that I knew a lot about and already had some references for. I would suggest focusing on something that you have knowledge or expertise in and can generate interesting or novel solutions/ideas about, (or at least write about a topic you would like to learn more about and can come up with some cool ideas or solutions to). I remember when I was writing this essay, I thought it was almost to general at times and questioned the validity of some of the solutions I came up with, and I want to tell you that's ok! It's research, no one knows the answer until someone tries it and as long as you have some reference supporting your ideas, I think it is at least worth some consideration. Also, if your suggestions are general because there isn't enough research to support a more specific approach, then you're most likely on the right track of where some research questions need to be answered! 

* <u>How did I structure the Public Safety Challenge essay?</u> I spent the first paragraph describing/defining the set of challenging public safety concerns. I then identified three key research areas (about a paragraph on each on) that were connected to my overarching challenge and discussed why and how each of these were challenging to solve and/or challenges these research areas currently face. Lastly, I proposed three general solutions or research areas (about a paragraph each) that could address or be applied to one or more of the identified challenges. When talking about these solutions I also commented on barriers that are currently preventing them from working or other advancements that might need to be made in tandem for the solutions to work.

* <u>How to submit?</u> I would suggest trying to finish up your part of the application package about 5-ish days before it's due so you or your advisor can find the right person to submit the application on your behalf. I believe it needs to be turned in by someone at your university’s graduate school/college and not your specific department. (Note: I might be wrong, my advisor was the one who figure out how to submit it.) 

* <u>What are they looking for in an applicant?</u> Honestly, your guess is as good as mine. If you want my opinion that I've gathered from my short time here, I think they are looking for motivated, hardworking individuals that are excited to learn more about and become a part of a wide range of criminal justice research. It seems NIJ is always looking for new ideas or different perspectives to bring to the table. Don't be afraid to showcase your unique research, how it brought you to applying to the NIJ-RAP, and what ideas excite you about the future of criminal justice research in general or your field.

* <u>How many hours a week is the RAship?</u> You, your university, and NIJ work this out once your accepted. Hours very, I work 3 days a week for NIJ, other RAs work 2.5 days a week, some work more or less. For me, I work two days on my dissertation work (plus weekends if needed) and 3 days on NIJ work. Overall, it depends on what you and your advisor are willing to do to let you work and get paid for. 

* <u>How are you balancing the RA with other responsibilities?</u> I am a 4th year student and plan on graduating in a year or year and a half from now. A huge factor in balancing the RAship is my advisor, I wouldn't be able to do it for so many reasons without her support. Dr. Albert is just as excited about the experience I am getting working at NIJ as I am. She understands the importance and the commitment I have made in being an RA at NIJ and has been amazing at being supportive and understanding. When I started, we talked about timeline for the reminder of my degree, while considering the time I am available to work. So far, I have been meeting our goals for that timeline and it has been working well.

* <u>Is it better for me to do the RA later or earlier in my PhD program?</u> I would say it doesn't matter, it's a great experience regardless of what stage you are at. A lot of past RAs were at the dissertation stage, and many that aren’t extend their RA-ship multiple years until they graduate. (That’s why some RAs work multiple years). Note: working RAship might extend your graduation time, but it is well worth the experience! For me, this first year shouldn't extend my time (it has limited the amount of work I can do with my advisor, but remember I am picking up other research experiences.). If I decide and can extend my RA-ship another year or half a year, it will impact my graduation date, but my advisor and I agree it is worth the experience, should I decide to go that route. 

* <u>Other Resources?</u> I am unaware of any other tips, but you can review the [webinar NIJ hosted](https://nij.ojp.gov/webinar-research-assistantship-program-academic-year-2021-2022) late last year and email NIJ's RAP manager at NIJ_RAP@usdoj.gov with any questions
 
Best of luck on your application! I know it’s a lot to prepare, but it’s worth it if you get it!
