---
title: What got me interested in Operations Research
tags: Operations Research, Outreach
# need both visible 1 and published false to not publish post
published: false
visible: 1
---
also table: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ft4QPUom5IdyOS6x8XH2J-zOSN0kmpDxOANbB48OqQw/edit 
I always liked math and science in middle school and high school. 
I knew I didint want to go into medicine so I through that maybe being an engineering would be a good fit, though I didn’t knwo which type. I got a college pamphlet in the mail that talked about industrial engineering, and the way it described making processes more efficient and being able to improve things using math made me want to explore more. When I had started my major my IE 101 professor Leslie Potter said “indusrial engineers improve processes to help people” and that last part really stuck with me. My favorite classes I took was my decision analysis and introduction to operations research. I was blown away that you could break down a complex decision problem into math and it result in the optimal or “best” solution. Now, I know that the way we build these decision problems and the information we use to help inform them are essential to understanding our solutions limitations and where it can apply. Today, I focus on helping people by anaylzing and informating our criminal justice systems that is far removed from using math to analyze its decision making. I hope the work I do can help people get the treatment they need, re-enter into society, and heal from trauma. I love I can use math and software to help people and solve complex problems,
I love that I know a lot about a wide variety of societal issues and get to help work toward making our systems better
I love working with a variety of stakeholders and decision makers. I find it frustrating that I am not the decision maker at times, but I love that I can work with many that will listen and colaborate. 
I love that  the policy changes or insights my analyses can provide help whole groups of people that are apart of the systems I analyze.
Activities that would’ve helped me get to what I love sooner:
Seeing a simple optimization model be solved
Seeing someone breakdown a complex everyday problem into a decision tree analysis
Infromation that would’ve helped me get to what i love sooner:
Understanding that the above activities fall under operations research and what doesn’t 
Knowing that operations research is multidisciplinary and that there are variety of majors you could do to get a career in it
Maybe a chart that outlines the strengths and weaknesses of each type of major to help you select. 
|       | Math, BS or BA                                                | Computer Science, BS or BA                                                                                | Industrial Engineering, BS                                                                           | Economics, BS or BA                   | Public Policy, BA                                                                 |
|-------|---------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Focus | Focus on theoretical foundations of operations research tools | Focus on coding required for solving many complex models, easier transition to Machine Learning problems  | Focus on process improvement Focus on applcition areas A variety of decision making tools are taught | Focus on modeling monetary decisions  | Focus on public policy applciations, and  understanding key decision stakeholders |
| gaps  | Stakeholder/applciaitons          